.TH CHESS-BASH 6 "July 2026" "chess-bash 0.2.0" "Games"
.SH NAME
chess-bash \- animated Battle-Chess-style chess for kitty-graphics terminals
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chess-bash
.RI [ option ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chess-bash
is a full chess game rendered as pixel-art armies on an isometric
battlefield, streamed to the terminal over the kitty graphics protocol.
Pieces march to their squares and captures play out as small battles,
in the spirit of the classic Battle Chess.
.PP
It supports Human vs Human, Human vs Computer and Computer vs Computer play.
Stockfish is used when available, with its skill adjusted for the selected
difficulty; otherwise a built-in AI searches one, two or three plies.
In Human vs Computer play as Blue, the board rotates to place the human army
nearest the player.
The full rules are enforced: castling, en passant, underpromotion with a
piece chooser, checkmate, stalemate, the fifty-move rule, threefold
repetition and insufficient material.
.PP
Legal quiet moves use dots and captures use outlines, check remains indicated
until answered, and status feedback remains visible in compact terminals.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-selftest " [seed] [plies]"
Run a headless random-move rules exercise and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-rules-test
Run deterministic rule and interaction regressions and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-perft-test
Run standard start-position and Kiwipete move-generator counts and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-perft " depth [fen]"
Count legal move-tree nodes from the initial position or an optional quoted
FEN.  Intended for rule development and verification.
.TP
.B \-\-fallback-test
Run a deterministic smoke test of the built-in AI without an external engine.
.TP
.B \-\-render-test " [seed]"
Write PPM screenshots of gameplay and UI states to
.B CHESS_BASH_RENDER_DIR
or the current directory, including every theme, selected targets, the compact
HUD and the rotated Blue-side view.  Missing assets and write failures produce
a nonzero exit status.
.TP
.B \-\-sound-test
Play every sound cue and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage.
.SH KEYS
.TP
.B Arrows / WASD
Move the cursor (menu: choose entry / change value).
.TP
.B Enter / Space
Select a piece or destination; confirm; skip the active battle animation.
.TP
.B Esc
Clear the selection; cancel the promotion chooser.
.TP
.B R
Resign (press twice); on the victory screen: rematch.
.TP
.B M
Toggle music.
.TP
.B F
Toggle fast battles.
.TP
.B S
Skip the current battle animation.
.TP
.B N
Return to the menu; press twice during a live game.
.TP
.B Q
Quit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B STOCKFISH
Path to a UCI engine binary (default: "stockfish" on PATH).
.TP
.B CHESS_BASH_ASSETS
Override the asset directory.
.TP
.B CHESS_BASH_SKIP_PROBE
Skip the kitty-graphics capability probe.
.TP
.B CHESS_BASH_RENDER_DIR
Directory used by
.B \-\-render-test
for generated snapshots (default: the current directory).
.SH AUDIO
Audio is optional.  Chess Bash streams PCM to the first available command from
.BR pacat (1),
.BR pw-play (1),
.BR aplay (1)
or SoX
.BR play (1).
If none is installed, the game continues silently.  Use
.B \-\-sound-test
to diagnose playback.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I PREFIX/share/chess-bash/assets
Installed image and audio assets.  The default prefix is
.IR /usr/local .
.TP
.I PREFIX/share/man/man6/chess-bash.6
Installed manual page.
.SH TERMINALS
Kilix is the primary tested terminal.  Kitty and other terminals implementing
the Kitty graphics protocol may also work.  SSH and terminal multiplexers must
pass the graphics escape sequences through unchanged.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kitty (1),
.BR stockfish (6)
